<!--
    The breve Simulation Environment documentation
    Copyright (C) 2003 Jonathan Klein
-->

<preface>
<title>Preface</title>

<sect1 id="origins">
<title>The Origin of breve</title>
<para>
The simulation software described in this document, breve, was initiated 
by <ulink url="mailto:jk [at] spiderland.org">jon klein</ulink> as a thesis 
project at <ulink url="http://www.hampshire.edu">Hampshire College</ulink> 
and was developed further into a Master's thesis at 
<ulink url="http://www.chalmers.se">Chalmers University</ulink>.  The 
software is actively being developed as a platform for a project building large 
scale simulations of evolutionary dynamics, but is also used for many other 
applications.
</para>
</sect1>

<sect1 id="about">
<title>About This Documentation</title>
<para>
The documentation presented here is new as of the release of breve 1.7.  
This documentation aims to supersede all previous breve documentation
by collecting it and organizing it into a single document.
</para>
<para>
This document is a work in progress.  See the section on "Getting
Help With breve" (<xref linkend="getting_help">) if this document fails to 
adequately describe any features or techniques.
</para>
</sect1>

<sect1 id="getting_help">
<title>Getting Help With breve</title>
<para>There are several ways to get help with using breve:
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>Read the class documentation for more detailed information about each class.  These class files are listed in <xref linkend="classes">.</para></listitem> 
<listitem><para>Join the breve mailing list at 
<ulink url="http://lists.spiderland.org/mailman/listinfo/breve">http://www.spiderland.org/mailman/listinfo/breve</ulink>.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Mail the author at <ulink url="mailto:jk [at] spiderland.org">jk [at] spiderland.org</ulink></para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</para>
</sect1>

<sect1 id="acknowledgements">
<title>Thanks &amp; Acknowledgments</title>
<para>
Thanks are due to (in no particular order):

<itemizedlist>

<listitem><para>
Lee and Kristian for allowing breve development to be part of my day job.
</para></listitem>

<listitem><para>
Eric and Ian for programming contributions.
</para></listitem>

<listitem><para>
Poornima, Seth and William for contributions to the NetworkServer features.
</para></listitem>

<listitem><para>
Laurie, for contributions to the breve-object and frontend APIs.
</para></listitem>

<listitem><para>
Jeff for design, testing and icons.
</para></listitem>

<listitem><para>
TiVo.
</para></listitem>

<listitem><para>
Irina, för att hon älskar mig som jag är.
</para></listitem>

</itemizedlist>

</para>

<para>
breve development is supported in part by an NSF Director's Award for 
Distinguished Teaching Scholars (PI: Lee Spector), by NSF grant EIA-0216344, 
and by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) and Air Force 
Research Laboratory, Air Force Materiel Command, USAF, under agreement number 
F30502-00-2-0611.
</para>

</sect1>

</preface>
